welcome back ladies and gentlemens and
thanks for tuning in laszlo montgomery
here with china history podcast episode
266.
we're finished with that nice little
overview on the history of the thai
chinese
thanks everyone who listened we'll dive
in and out in the months and years to
come and relook at some of the histories
of the other great
overseas chinese communities southeast
asia
and elsewhere but before we do that i
wanted to come back to my home country
the usa and take a look at someone i'm
guessing you never heard of
if you've studied physics or if you're a
chinese american
familiar with your proud history of
achievement in this nation
then perhaps you probably have heard of
her
one of the reasons i thought that this
might be a timelier topic than usual is
because on february 11th of this year
2021 the last day of the year of the rat
and the day before
chewie first day of the year of the ox
dr
c s woo woojie and xiangbo shirt will be
honored with a commemorative postage
stamp
in these united states now i'm not sure
how many of you studied physics in high
school or university
or just had a natural aptitude for this
subject
that plays a pretty prominent role in
today's story
if you never studied physics before and
the whole subject remains a mystery
no big deal you can still appreciate
this great american scientist's life
and when the subject of immigration is
hotly debated in the government
the courts and in the media as it is so
passionately for and against let's
remember
jian zhang wu who in her day and into
ours as well
was a living breathing advertisement for
holding that line with respect to all
that the statue of liberty stands for
jian shong woo lived from to 1912-19
their first 24 years were spent in china
and as we know from i don't know how
many past chp
episodes 1912 to 1936
were pretty tumultuous years the warlord
era
the nanjing decade that's the world she
grew up in
no one gets to choose their parents but
in jin chong wu's case
she was lucky her mother was a teacher
and her father wu chong yi he was a very
progressive sort considering the times
he lived in
he was trained as an engineer and
founded a school for girls in their
hometown of taitung
in lyoko town that was about 30 miles
north of shanghai
in jiangsu province right where the
yangtze river
empties into the east china sea today
that area is part of suzhou
so access to good education was never
denied
to jin xiong woo from her earliest days
and this had quite a great impact on all
that was to follow in her amazing life
this ming da vocational continuing
school for girls was one of the first of
its kind in china
she studied there until 1923 and then
aged 11 went on to the suzhou school for
girls electing to study to become a
teacher
from there she went to the shanghai gong
where one of her teachers there was
sure one of the most influential
writers thinkers and teachers in 20th
century chinese history
he's also a chp topic i haven't gotten
to yet
her father sure and others who followed
and who i'll be mentioning
had a profound impact on the path
she took in life and in the magnitude of
what she would
later go on to achieve all the way up
until the end
she maintained a close student-teacher
relationship with housher
up until his death in 1962. in 1929
jian shong-woo was admitted to national
central university in nanjing
this institution is today called nanjing
university
one of china's more historic and
respected institutions of higher
learning
already showing a clear aptitude for
science
she majored first in mathematics and
then switched over to physics in her
second year
the great polish scientist and french
naturalized citizen
madame marie curie had already achieved
much of her acclaim by then
the 1903 nobel in physics then the 1911
nobel in chemistry
and so many other discoveries and
accolades
she passed in 1934 and as marie curie
did for
so many others she provided no small
degree of inspiration to jin shong woo
as well especially with respect to her
quest for
further understanding of physics jin
shong graduated in 1934
summa laude with the highest
distinction and with that
she had her bachelor of science degree
under her belt
from there she went to another
prestigious school jojong university in
hangzhou
and there for only a year she studied
and worked as a teacher's assistant
she also worked at a lab run by the
academia seneca
the institution that i believe
inspired the name of that modern day
feast of business political and cultural
news the
seneca podcast and there she did
research on
x-ray crystallography and there at the
academia cynica between 1935 1936 she
studied with a professor named gujjin
wei
who had just returned from studying in
the united states
professor gu was another person in
jianshungwu's life
who had quite a major impact
it was professor gu who provided her the
mentorship and advice about her future
and she suggested to jian chong wu that
she go to america to continue her
advanced studies
get a grad degree and soak up whatever
learning could be obtained there so
that's what she did
1936 she opted to follow the advice of
her advisor
guching wei and head to the united
states to the university where professor
goo had studied
at the university of michigan so with
some financial assistance from her uncle
and gucci way's encouragement in august
of 1936
she boarded the ss president hoover and
sailed for san francisco
this vessel by the way that uh gianchong
will sail to the west coast of the
united states on the ss hoover
the following year saw action during the
battle of shanghai
this was one of the ships inadvertently
bombed by the nationalist chinese air
force in their attempts to sink the
japanese cruiser
itsumo a year after she took jianshong
wu to america
the hoover was being used to evacuate
american nationals from shanghai
and ended up getting bombed the vessel
wasn't sunk but it had to abandon
the evacuation plans and sail back for
repairs and then later on in december
that fateful year 1937
the ss hoover was wrecked after it ran
aground off the southeast coast of
taiwan
anyway in 1936 she came to america
now i don't want to point at jin shong
woo and say hey
ain't a forward-looking immigration
policy great so many of our
greatest and highest achieving citizens
well they weren't born here
they emigrated here from the lands of
their birth
well giang wu isn't the best example
because she
never intended to stick around here the
plan was to go to america
head to ann arbor study at the
university of michigan
get her phd and then take the next
vessel
back home to china there was so much
happening
she stopped first at uc berkeley
she met a young student there named luke
yen you antialio
his grandfather was yen shirkai who by
had been dead for 20 years so luke yen
was studying physics at berkeley
and introduced jenshong to one of his
professors who
was one of the shiniest stars of uc
berkeley
ernest o lawrence lawrence would go on
to win the 1939 nobel in physics for his
invention of the cyclotron
and he was also the founder of both the
lawrence berkeley lab
and the lawrence livermore national lab
he was born in canton by the way
well canton south dakota that is two
things
changed zhenchong wu's plans to start
heading out to ann
arbor over in the wolverine state first
of all
meeting someone the likes of this 20th
century towering figure in the field of
physics
ernest o lawrence well that was pretty
awe inspiring
especially to a 24 year old foreign
student of physics
it took a little convincing on
lawrence's part plus a monthly stipend
he arranged to convince
jianshung to pursue her grad degree at
berkeley instead
and the university of california
berkeley
that was where a lot of the big stuff
was happening in physics at that
time the other thing that sort of turned
her off about michigan was that women
and men were still
segregated in the classrooms and as far
as funding and academic support
and the women's students were given the
good old short shrift
so coming from her background in an
upbringing and a father who
hammered the notion into her since
childhood that girls can
achieve anything boys can achieve well
that helped seal it for jen shong as she
decided to go
with the university of california and
ernest o lawrence he became her academic
advisor
and she threw herself into her work your
phd thesis
investigated vision of uranian atoms
something that ended up becoming pretty
important in physics for the remainder
of the 1930s and into the 40s
she also worked on the understanding of
two xenon isotopes and their atomic
lifetime and decay properties
something that will come in handy later
on so for the next four years
jin zhong woo soaked up everything that
she could and advanced her understanding
of physics
i guess about as well as anyone with her
brilliant mind could at a place that was
on the forefront of atomic physics
research
everything was going well for her and
she looked forward to
finishing up her studies returning to
china and to continue her research and
teaching but we all know what the
benefits of hindsight
1936 wasn't the best time to be making
any big plans for one's future in china
the next year july 7th the marco polo
bridge incident
three years to the day before ringo was
born the battle
of bei ping and tianjin battle of
shanghai
and to finish off one of the most
violent and bloody years in the history
of the republic of china
the nanjing massacre was carried out in
december and into the following year of
the rest of that history we all know
many chinese citizens in 2020 and into
this year have been left stranded around
the world because of kovid
well in jianchong woo's case she was in
a similar kind of situation and couldn't
go back to china either because
well there was no pandemic but her
homeland was in the throes of battle
and even when that ended in 1945 four
more years a civil war followed
and when it was all over in 1949 she
couldn't go back anyway
so when jin chong woo waved goodbye to
her parents on her way to america
alas she would never see them again and
she wouldn't return to china until 1973
a year after president nixon and premier
joe
shook hands on the tarmac at beijing
capitol airport
so i guess you could say we in america
got lucky
and in 1940 with phd in hand and a
brilliant future ahead of her
dr c.s wu as she was known by many
colleagues and students
began her work so she wasn't a chinese
immigrant
but because of world events and the
bloody
history being written in her homeland
she ended up becoming one
and the united states of america ended
up becoming the
primary beneficiary in this matter with
hopes of pursuing a teaching career
and continuing on with her research
jianchong tried to pursue her academic
dreams at cal berkeley and begin her
rise up the
curses enorm of academia but as the
1930s came to a close and the decade of
the 40s began
there were still three things that
weren't terribly welcome in the halls of
academia and professorships
met cal at least one was jews the other
was asians
followed by women and i guess you could
include legend de coler
general and having to face two of those
roadblocks
jen shong-woo had to reconsider her
plans
so she took a position at smith college
in northampton massachusetts
gee why leave idyllic california
well luke yen had ended up getting his
phd in physics at caltech
in 1937 and took a position with rca
in 1942 and they were located in
princeton
and so the two got married and headed to
the east coast
while luke yen busied himself working on
radar technology
his new bride dr c s wu woojienshong
continued her teaching as i said first
at smith and then
to be closer to luke she took a position
at princeton
in march 1944 the top secret manhattan
project was in full swing
and she was invited to join the team of
well at that time
the most brilliant minds in the usa in
the world of physics
chemistry and engineering they were all
combining their accumulated brain power
to build an atomic bomb
that might bring this world war to a
speedy end
so she paid farewell to her husband this
grandson of such a famous and historic
person of the late qing dynasty
and early republican period and she
headed to the big apple to start work at
the
manhattan district project based at
columbia university
where the division of war research was
located on weekends
she'd head to new jersey to be with her
husband their son
and a future physicist himself vincent
was born in 1947.
during the week she worked on developing
the accuracy of geiger counters
and the enrichment of uranium 235 and
238 in large quantities
something quite important to the
building of any self-respecting nuclear
arsenal
the processes that she helped to develop
in the lab
were replicated in mass production later
on at the national laboratory
in oak ridge tennessee at the 44-acre
k-25 uranium separating facility there
helped win the war and over at the site
in hanford washington
established in 1943 as part of the
manhattan project
well that's what they were doing all the
research and manufacturing of plutonium
the material used in both the trinity
and nagasaki bombs when the bee reactor
there
kept shutting down and scientists were
scratching their heads wondering why
jian shong wu thanks to earlier research
she had done
pointed out the problem with xenon 135
one of the fission products of uranium
that was poisoning the nuclear reaction
and causing the reactor to shut down
and there at columbia where she did much
of her work on the manhattan project
for pretty much the remainder of her
career dr c.s wu became a permanent
fixture
at the department of physics there and
it didn't take very long before jian
zhang wu became one of the leading
minds in the study of two aspects of
physics
that she taught and carried out research
on for the remainder of her days
beta decay and the weak interaction
now here is where our story starts to
run into a little more physics than
what you bargained for again if you
never studied this in school it's okay i
went my whole life without
understanding the rules of physics and
though i often heard or read of the term
beta decay for most of my adult life
other than it involving at the
sub-atomic level a neutron becoming a
proton and throwing off an electron
or beta particle and in the process
transforming the atom into a new element
on the periodic table
can't say much beyond that ernest
rutherford first theorized beta decay in
calling the penetrating rays alpha or
beta depending on their strength of
penetration
in the matter of beta decay had a big
year in 1933 when enrico fermi
came up with the term neutrino and the
theory of weak interaction
and though the understanding of this bit
of science seems way over most of our
heads
it became the focus of chiang chong wu's
efforts for the remainder of her days
beta decay and the weak force and she
later carried out experiments that
proved fermi's 1933 theory correct
and for her work as what's known as
an experimentalist she became the
acknowledged expert in this field
an experimentalist proves that something
is true
a theory for example by designing an
experiment
and measuring the outcome that was her
great gift
an experimentalist with few peers and
after the war
for all the work she did at columbia she
earned a reputation as
the one to confer with on all things
involving
radioactive beta decay and for the
meticulous precision of the work she
carried out
as an experimentalist jian xiong-woo
when faced with a question of physics
was able to take in
all the science the theories and
equations
which wasn't proven but thought to be
true because the laws of physics said it
was and she would do the math
work with the machines design the
experiment
and come to a conclusion that either
proved a theory
right or wrong beta decay
that's defined in many ways but one of
the definitions says it's
any of three processes of radioactive
disintegration by which
some unstable atomic nuclei
spontaneously shoots off excess energy
and undergoes a change of unit of
positive charge
without any change in the mass number
these three radioactive processes
are electron emission positron emission
and electron capture if anyone's
drowning
don't worry that's as deep as we'll go
in beta decay as i said one of the
neutrons contained in the nucleus
suddenly changes into a proton which
causes the atomic number to change
transforming one substance into another
atoms do that they suddenly without
warning or any fanfare
they change into different atoms she
really made her mark in the 1950s
for what jian shong wu is most
remembered for
the 1950s was her decade 1952
in yet another first she was made an
associate professor at columbia
first woman to hold a tenured faculty
position in the physics department
in 1954 gianchong received a very
disturbing letter from her father
who advised her that life in china
was looking like it was going to be
rough on families like theirs with
their class background education and kmt
taint he advised her best not to return
and all that that meant in that year she
applied for and received u.s citizenship
and two years later in 1956 came the
moment for which she is
best remembered and i guess one of the
main reasons she's
being honored on a u.s commemorative
postage stamp
there were two scientists td lee and c.n
young they wanted to prove something now
since the time of galileo physicists
relied on the laws of symmetry
to understand nature's laws this is
symmetry under translation of space
and time not the symmetry one might see
in a mirror
td lee and c.n yang wanted to prove a
hunch they had about the law of
conservation of
parody and as far as td lee knew there
was still
no evidence that parody conservation was
preserved in the weak
interaction the law had been tested in
many circumstances
but not all td lee
had just been made a full professor at
columbia at the age of 29.
j robert oppenheimer had nothing but
great things to say about
lee chang dao td was just about the
hottest thing happening in the world of
physics
a great mind so he and his colleagues cn
yang
yangchan ning who he knew from the
institute for advanced study at
princeton
well they wanted to prove that one of
the basic laws of quantum mechanics
conservation of parity was violated
in the weak force or weak interaction
this challenged one of the fundamental
beliefs that scientists had about the
entire universe
it had been accepted as a given but td
lee had already done a bit of the brain
work that
cast some doubt on this ever since the
birth of modern physics
physicists had been devising experiments
and measuring the amount of energy that
would
shoot out from all kinds of exotic
materials and an early thing they found
out was that
this radiation as it came to be called
did a lot of stuff that
had scientists baffled of the four
fundamental forces that govern all
matter in the universe
including me and you it was the weak
force
that was the least understood the other
three as any student of physics can tell
you
are the strong force gravity and
electromagnetism
td lee went to jinxing woo and asked her
to devise the experiment
that the law of conservation parity did
not exist
during beta decay when it came to this
matter of radiation and beta decay and
the weak force
she was the primus inter paris with
respect to her peers in the scientific
community so this experiment that she
and her students devised
well in the history of science it will
later be referred to
as the wu experiment it was like
everything she did
elegant precise and yielded
unambiguous results that well providing
they had the equipment
could be repeated in any laboratory
anywhere in the world
always with the same result from the
outset she knew the element cobalt
cobalt 60
would be the perfect material to use for
this experiment with its
innate properties beta decay would be
much easier to measure
with its nuclei all lined up perfectly
spinning in the right direction
polarized in a well-determined direction
the results would be easier to measure
she had a lot of help from the national
bureau of standards who at that time
had the equipment and the most potent
brain trust of experts on low
temperature spin polarization
and this team of scientists knew how to
utilize radioactive cobalt
60 at near absolute zero temperatures
achieved with liquid nitrogen and helium
and strong electromagnetic fields
and once they did their work and
everything was designed
and put in place well all that had to be
done
was to observe the outcome when the
nuclei started breaking down
and rather than breaking down and
shooting off particles in the direction
of the spin of the nuclei
more were ejected in the opposite
direction as well
when the nuclei were lined up the
particles being emitted
should have all shot off in the same
direction but they didn't
and this confirmed that in the weak
force identical nuclear particles
did not always act alike and there were
two other teams of scientists
racing to prove td lee and cn yang's
theory
and if you think american politics is
brutal well at the upper echelons of
academia and research
it's nearly just as competitive one of
the three groups
at the university of chicago was led by
valentina toledy
a colleague who was very critical
of jian zhang wu he had later said of
her experiment quote
you and most of mankind refer to this as
wu's experiment
well that is very romantic but it is
false you see in order to do this
experiment
you have to align nuclei which in 1956
was an art
a technique known only to a handful of
people in the world
so madame wu had to look for somebody
who knew how to align nuclei
so she proposed to these people at the
bureau of standards that they do the
experiment together
the heavy part the significant part the
difficult part
was done by these people at the bureau
and not by her
her specialty was radioactivity she knew
how to count the beta rays that would
come out
but about the alignment technique that
was the crucial part of the experiment
she knew strictly zero so to give full
credit to her is a crime
end quote and when td lee and c.n yang
won the 1958 nobel prize in physics for
this discovery
cn yang said in his nobel speech of jian
chong-woo
and the scientists who worked with her
on the experiment
quote the actual experimental setup was
very involved
because to eliminate disturbing outside
influences the experiment had to be done
at
very low temperatures the technique of
combining beta decay measurement with
low temperature apparatus was unknown
before
and constituted a major difficulty which
was successfully solved
by these authors to their courage and
their skill
physicists owe the exciting and
clarifying developments concerning
parity conservation
in the past year end quote
so lee and yang got the nobel prize for
their paper
experimental test of parody conservation
and beta decay
qian xiong-woo did not share the prize
with them
she contributed key ideas and direction
on how to proceed and of course you know
led the
experimentation process but when it came
time to put her name on the paper
and to be nominated for the nobel prize
she was not included
and if there were any hard feelings or
collegial animosity dr
c.s wu had for lee and yang
she never showed it or mentioned it in
the world of academia
she was outranked by them those two were
full professors
td lee by the way to this day since his
naturalization in 1962
remains the youngest american since
world war ii
to have ever won a nobel prize he was
only 31 at the time
still the third youngest of all time he
had said of his longtime
friend and colleague at columbia quote
c.s wu was one of the giants of physics
in the field of beta decay she had no
equal
end quote well where do you go from
there
the rest of jian zhong wu's career was
one award
accolade and achievement after another
and she
worked tirelessly with her students in a
modest laboratory
not in one of those national or fancy
corporate labs and her standard attire
underneath her lab coat
was always a chinese chi pao dress sewn
by herself of course
in 1958 she was made a full professor at
columbia
as well as being elected to the national
academy of sciences
that institution was established by
lincoln
in 1863 with a mission that called for
quote
independent objective advice to the
nation
on matters related to science and
technology
and to provide scientific advice to the
government whenever called upon
by any government department end quote
also in that same year she was awarded a
scd degree
a science doctoral first woman to ever
hang one of those distinguished degrees
on her wall
these are only handed out in recognition
to scientists whose body of work
made a sustained contribution to
scientific knowledge over the course of
their career
the scd or doctor of science degree
is described as the one that's one notch
higher than a phd
in any case it's an honorary degree and
you have to be more than the smartest
one in the room all the time to get it
among her more notable prizes was the
cyrus b comstock prize in physics
awarded every five years
she joined other notables and receiving
this
pretty prestigious prize including her
former advisor at uc
berkeley ernesto lawrence her 1965 book
entitled simply
beta decay came out and is still in use
in our day as a
standard physics reference book in 1973
she was made the michael i
poopin professor of physics at columbia
and in 1975
not only was her salary at columbia
raised to equal that of her male
counterparts
she was also awarded the national medal
of science for physical sciences hans
beth
the great german american was also
awarded this
great american honor in that same year
he had been awarded the nobel in 1967.
at the ceremony she was lauded quote for
her ingenious experiments that led to
new
and surprising understanding of the
decay of the radioactive nucleus
end quote and also 1975 cs wu
was awarded the bonner prize that
recognized and encouraged outstanding
experimental research
in nuclear physics in 1978 she became
the first
recipient of the wolf prize that awarded
living scientists and artists
for quote achievements in the interest
of mankind
and friendly relations among people
irrespective of nationality
race color religion sex or political
views
end quote the wolf prizes for physics
and chemistry
though not as well known as the more
famous nobel prizes are considered no
less prestigious
of the 26 prizes offered between 1978
and 2010 14 of them went on to accept a
no bell
the wolf prize is named for cuban-born
ricardo wolf
the inventor of process that recovered
iron during the smelting process
like alfred nobel did with his dynamite
fortune
wolf established and endowed the wolf
foundation in israel in 1975.
he had a rather amazing life and was
also a diplomat
the prize is presented annually in a
rotating field of achievement
those being in agriculture chemistry
mathematics medicine physics and art
so when she was awarded this prize in
its inaugural year
it was another first for jian xiong-woo
in 1975 she also became the first woman
to head the american physical society
established in
1899 quote to advance and diffuse the
knowledge of physics
end quote all previous presidents of the
society
had been white males so when she was
given the top spot
she broke two barriers and one fell
swoop first woman
and first asian president gerald r ford
also presented her with the national
medal of science in that year
1998 she was inducted into the national
women's hall of fame
after she retired from colombia in 1981
she became a tireless crusader for
attracting women to the sciences
she traveled regularly to taiwan and the
mainland promoting educational programs
in both places always conveying the same
message of inspiration of embracing the
sciences
something she had been doing even before
she retired from colombia
it was part of her mission to try and
inspire women to embrace the sciences
and all of the so-called stem fields
science
technology engineering and math
she blamed the dearth of women who chose
a career in the sciences
on guidance counselors who wouldn't
suggest this as a career path
child care and the expectations of a
society that
on her day still limited women to the
traditional roles of housework and
raising kids
among her other achievements maybe her
proudest one who knows
where the three dozen or so grad
students who were at her side
like acolytes throughout the 60s and 70s
and became family to her any young women
aspiring to achieve in the sciences in
general and
physics in particular can always look to
cs wu
jian xiang wu as their academic patron
saints and role models
on february 16th 1997
jian zhong wu had a stroke and passed
away soon afterwards
she was 84. her ashes were taken to
china
and you could visit her tomb today at
the mingta school the same one
established by her father
who served as headmaster once where her
education began
all those years ago td lee himself
designed the memorial site there's also
a woojie and xiongcinyengwan or
jianshong woo memorial hall located on
the campus of
southeast university in nanjing today
she's remembered as the first lady of
physics the chinese madame curie
and the queen of nuclear research like i
said
she's being honored in this country by
the government she serves so well
during the manhattan project and and the
legacy she leaves behind
with a commemorative postage stamp you
can get it at the usps store
comes in a pane of 20 stamps along with
the usual
first day issue packages you know when
she visited china in 1973
a year after nixon broke the ice with
our enemy for almost three decades
premier joe and lai met with her and
apologized to her personally for the
desecration of her parents graves and
for the persecution and death of her
brother
and uncle during the cultural revolution
when she was still a child back in
lyocha taitang
her father had presented her with three
books
that had such a profound impact on her
at that time
they set her on the path that took her
to amazing places where she attained
such great heights
these were three books on chemistry
algebra and physics
and from these three books came the
story of jian zheng wu that i'm telling
you today
she had said once quote imagine what a
near-miss it had been
if it hadn't been for my father's
encouragement i wouldn't have had the
courage to select physics as a major
field
and i would be teaching grade school
somewhere in china now
end quote so that's going to be it
we ran a little long please don't hold
me in too much contempt for that
hey how about supporting me at
patreon.com slash china history podcast
or
you know throw a fuselati in my begging
bowl at paypal dot me
slash china history podcast you're
positive vibes and kindly donations
will go a long way in keeping this going
another couple weeks
links are at the webpage at tcup dot
media
okay laszlo montgomery here signing off
from fantastic la here in der
goldenstadt
see you next time for sure i hope for
another exciting episode
of the china history podcast
you